# pcos
20.440 project

# overview
This repo contains code that analyzes scRNAseq data of ovarian tissue from healthy controls and PCOS patients. Analysis includes clustering and celltype annotations based on transcriptional signatures, PARAFAC2 decomposition, and GSEA.

All code in this repo was written by our team. Libraries used for analysis and their citations are included at the bottom of the README.

# data
The data was generated by Harris et al. It represents scRNAseq data of 10 samples (5 PCOS, 5 healthy controls). "Human theca interna tissue was obtained from follicles of women undergoing hysterectomy" After treatment, processing, and freezing in liquid N2, all samples were sent to "Active Motif (Carlsbad, CA, USA) for... single-cell library preparation, using Active Motifs proprietary conditions. Following single-cell library preparation, 10× single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) was performed using an Illumina NextSeq 500 (San Diego, CA, USA) sequencing apparatus to generate 91 bp sequencing reads."

You can access the .zip file of raw data online at https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37445796/. In the data folder of this repo, you may access the .h5ad file that contains the integrated, preprocessed data stored as an anndata object. The anndata object has the following structure:

AnnData object with n_obs × n_vars = 20775 (cells) × 28851 (genes)
- obs: 'sample', 'treatment', 'donor_id', 'disease_status', 'n_genes_by_counts', 'log1p_n_genes_by_counts', 'total_counts', 'log1p_total_counts', 'pct_counts_in_top_50_genes', 'pct_counts_in_top_100_genes', 'pct_counts_in_top_200_genes', 'pct_counts_in_top_500_genes', 'total_counts_mt', 'log1p_total_counts_mt', 'pct_counts_mt', 'total_counts_ribo', 'log1p_total_counts_ribo', 'pct_counts_ribo', 'total_counts_hb', 'log1p_total_counts_hb', 'pct_counts_hb', 'n_genes'
- var: 'mt', 'ribo', 'hb', 'n_cells_by_counts', 'mean_counts', 'log1p_mean_counts', 'pct_dropout_by_counts', 'total_counts', 'log1p_total_counts', 'n_cells', 'highly_variable', 'means', 'dispersions', 'dispersions_norm', 'highly_variable_nbatches', 'highly_variable_intersection'
- uns: 'log1p', 'hvg', 'pca', 'sample_colors', 'treatment_colors', 'disease_status_colors', 'neighbors', 'umap'
- obsm: 'X_pca', 'X_umap'
- varm: 'PCs'
- layers: 'counts'
- obsp: 'distances', 'connectivities'

Citation: Harris RA, McAllister JM, Strauss JF 3rd. Single-Cell RNA-Seq Identifies Pathways and Genes Contributing to the Hyperandrogenemia Associated with Polycystic Ovary Syndrome. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Jun 25;24(13):10611. doi: 10.3390/ijms241310611. PMID: 37445796; PMCID: PMC10341507.


# folder structure
[tree with each notable file and what it does
table underneath with brief description of what it is, input/output if we want]
There are 2 main folders: code and data

- code: contains all code for the project. This folder contains 3 main subfolders
  - Clustering and Annotation: contains code for clustering and annotation based on transcriptional signatures of cells
  - PARAFAC:
  - GSEA: contains code for GSEA of all cells and immune cells for both non-parafac and parafac-transformed data
- data: contains preprocessed integrated data (.h5ad)


# installation
To run the code, first, download the preprocessed data file (integrated_data.h5ad) and the python script of your choice. Next, make sure the correct versions of each package are installed in your environment. Then, open the python script and change the data_path variable to be the local location of the integrated_data file you downloaded. Now, you may run the script. 

Software & package versions
 - python=3.9
 - anndata=0.11.4
 - scanpy=1.11.1
 - numpy=2.0.2
 - matplotlib=3.10.0
 - pandas=2.2.2
 - h5py=3.7
 - seaborn=0.13.2
 - gseapy=1.1.8


# citations and acknowledgements
[just for code]

scanpy: Wolf, F., Angerer, P. & Theis, F. SCANPY: large-scale single-cell gene expression data analysis. Genome Biol 19, 15 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-017-1382-0

GSEApy: Fang Z, Liu X, Peltz G. GSEApy: a comprehensive package for performing gene set enrichment analysis in Python. Bioinformatics. 2023 Jan 1;39(1):btac757. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btac757. PMID: 36426870; PMCID: PMC9805564.

seaborn: Waskom, M. L., (2021). seaborn: statistical data visualization. Journal of Open Source Software, 6(60), 3021, https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.03021



